This video is brought to you by movie mavens.
What's up wisecrack Michael here today, I come to you with a simple question.
Who lives in a pineapple.
That's right. We're talking about SpongeBob square pants, perhaps.
No animated children's show is dominated culture.
Quite like SpongeBob has running for 21 years. Straight.
SpongeBob is a juggernaut that has captured the hearts of children, teenagers,
adults, and of course yours truly, which brings us to the real question at hand.
Why,
how is SpongeBob square pants able to speak to the existential concerns of both
recently potty trained toddlers and meme obsessed 30 somethings while we can
bring up the show's pension for double entendre?
Yeah. Genius is showing and it's exciting.
Oppressive animation.
We think the answer is rooted in something more sociological,
the concept of childhood.
So join me for this wisecrack addition on SpongeBob square pants.
And before we continue,
I want to give a quick shout out to our friends over in movie mavens for
sponsoring this video.
If you're looking for more smart stuff about SpongeBob after you finished our
video, go check out the video they just released today. And after that,
you can check out all the other awesome shows they've reviewed in-depth in the
past, which includes some of our favorites that we've yet to cover.
If you head on over to their SpongeBob video,
make sure you like comment on what to review next and subscribe.
So you will be entered into their movie lover giveaway,
earning the chance to win in mini projectors so you can watch all the stuff
we've covered on the channel anywhere on the go. In fact,
you can even watch our videos. If you hook up your phone,
the giveaway only lasts until September 28th.
So don't forget to subscribe and comment that wisecrack sent you all the
official rules and details will be on their page. So check it out.
The link to the video is in the description. So click here to learn more. Now,
back to the show. Now,
for those of you who haven't spring break in bikini bottom,
here's the deal essentially.
ANSI sponge lives in an undersea pineapple and spends his days getting up to
hi-jinks with this starfish, pal Patrick, while holding down a job as a fry,
cook much hilarity ensues.
High demand, and Trent and a year club on the grounds that I am not a weenie.
How's it going? You were saying.
To make sense of SpongeBob's enduring legacy. We need to talk about childhood,
the concept of childhood as being a special time in our lives during which we
need to be nurtured, loved,
and fed bagel bites while playing Mario kart is a relatively new phenomenon.
As we've noted in a previous video, that's not to say that in the good old days,
children weren't loved just that this love often came with a hardhat and a
Canary, according to a story and Felipe areas,
our awareness of the particular nature of childhood developed in the Western
consciousness over various stages. Back in medieval times, for example,
children reviewed essentially as adults and miniature,
who were able to hold gainful employment,
joined the convent and even get engaged at the tender age of seven fast forward
a few hundred years to Puritan times,
and children reviewed more as the property of God who were very much at risk of
being led astray by the red guy down stairs,
consequently needed to scare the crap out of them to keep them in line by the
late 19th century areas are used along with the rise of psychology and universal
education.
We start to see our modern view of childhood one in which children are to be
guided past to various developmental and educational milestones.
And this is where one Robert's Squarepants comes in. See,
most of today's children's media is built upon these modern views of childhood.
These stories target highly specific age groups using characters and storylines
that map to their demographics development and education. In other words,
whether it's Daniel Tiger's neighborhood or everyone's favorite football head
storylines, usually to pick characters,
dealing with the typical problems problems,
which can be mapped along to the real life development of the children.
How you feel when you can't see your friends.
You know, lessons about taking turns
Or dealing with bullies by going full karate kid,
But SpongeBob square pants rips up this playbook entirely for one,
the sponge guy himself is rather ambiguously aged while his driver's license
pigs, him as initially 13 years old, he bears many marks of adulthood.
He lives on his own as a full-time job and takes care of his pet snail.
Incidentally, according to this metric,
I am 66.6% in adult. Moreover, many of the shows,
storylines aren't exactly aimed at kids.
Who was flickering the lights.
Exactly your typical kitty fair. At the same time.
SpongeBob is definitely a kid at heart. He loves blowing bubbles. Camp passes.
No, no, no. Don't
[inaudible] embodies kid like naivete.
One time I tried this magician and he hit this thing anyway.
And then he told us if you believe in yourself and the
magic dreams can come.
This paradox is intentional.
The creators Steven Hillenburg pushed back when Nickelodeon wanted to overly
kitify SpongeBob by making them attend school. According to Hillenburg,
the network actually wanted to make the show, Hey, Arnold, under the seat,
something the world surely does not need. Interestingly,
by making SpongeBob and explicitly unconventional blur between child and adult
Hillenburg gets to explore various historical conceptions of childhood.
For example,
our naive SpongeBob often embodies the Puritan model of a child that needs to be
scared straight from any mischief. In one episode,
Mr. Krabs Warrens are wide-eyed protagonist about the danger of the hooks.
They dangle down and draw your close with them,
bees and shapes and they're beguiling. And just when you think your home,
the land of milk and honey, they crap you by the British and hurry up, wait,
wait, wait, wait, wait, what is happening?
And then they cook it and then they eat. Ya are worse. Yikes.
This horrifying slash dramatic speech parallels,
many popular old school Puritan teachings about kids falling into sin creature.
Thomas Brooks, for example,
issued a similar warning to kids about a scary pit of sin. Writing that key,
who will be so bold as to attempt to dance upon the brink of the pit may find by
woeful experience that it is a righteous thing with God that he should fall into
the pit pit or hook both warnings, bear nightmare,
inducing implications for your average tight,
but SpongeBob draws on more than just a Puritan conception of childhood.
Arguably, anytime SpongeBob Don says Krusty Krab uniform,
he's being seen as a little laborer embodying the medieval conception of
childhood SpongeBob is absorbed with his work and obsessed with his perpetual
status as employees.
Yeah. The month Mr. Cramps gave you that award.
So you'll work harder for no extra money. That is not true. Squidward. Hey,
gives it to me because I work harder. You can win it too. If you tried harder.
Our Intrepid.
Fry cook oblivious to his own exploitation is willing to do anything for his job
and is easily goated into destroying his friendship and the fry cook game.
Don't forget the code yellow
like innocent.
[Inaudible] medieval child nun. SpongeBob's job is all important.
The show like most children's television sometimes also embraces a more modern
perspective on childhood showing SpongeBob, dealing with developmental issues,
like learning to tie his shoes and realizing that stealing is bad.
We have the good first. Are you out of your mind,
do video, do what they do to people like us. We're not talking about
[inaudible] hi, Jackie, here.
They're going to lock us up.
Indeed.
The network seems to have eventually sort of gotten its way and that SpongeBob
like your average kid does occasionally go to school, albeit a boating school.
This setting allows sponge about to encounter issues.
More typical to children's shows things like cheating.
I know, right? You can change.
[inaudible] cheap that way.
Now, big caveat. We're not saying that by making SpongeBob's age fluid,
Hillenburg intentionally meant to explore areas as a historical model childhood.
Rather,
it seems that by letting SpongeBob move seamlessly between the domains of
childhood and adulthood, along with histories,
various views surrounding these realms,
Hillenburg allows the show to speak to kids and adults. At the same time,
the kids get to watch SpongeBob gleefully break the rules while parents can
crack a smile with the double meaning of the word.
Hooky, we're going to go play.
Just some jokes, address kids and adults at the same time.
Like when Patrick teaches SpongeBob, how to act like a grownup to impress him.
Grandma, what are you going to tell grandma? I'm a grownup, no ifs,
ands or buts about it. A man's got to do what a man's got to
push Patrick. We didn't say that something.
Tells me the little kids aren't quite registering the grand matricide joke here.
This ability to address multiple audiences at once. Didn't start with SpongeBob.
Rather.
It's an aspect of children's literature and media dating back to the 18th
century. According to scholar, Kimberly Reynolds,
when publishers began printing children's books,
they realized they had to satisfy the demands of two markets.
The kids that consume the stories and the parents that buy them.
According to author Barbara Wall,
having to satisfy two distinct audiences and a single text,
often leads writers to variously employed three distinctive narrative styles.
First there's the double address. When the narrator talks over the child,
addressing the adult in the room, think Patrick's joke about killing grandma.
Then there's the single address. When the narrator talks solely to the child,
think of those gross out closeups, that SpongeBob employees,
things that get the kids laughing, but aren't exactly Whitney.
Beautiful how beautiful the [inaudible].
Okay. Some of them are pretty good,
which by wall's definition would make them examples of the third narrative style
dual address or talking to both children and adults simultaneously while other
children's properties may both separately and duly address kids and adults.
SpongeBob's ability to seamlessly switch between all three narrative styles is
what makes it so special. But why is SpongeBob so unique in this way?
Why don't we find jokes about doing drugs or killing loved ones or watching porn
in other children's media?
I was just looking for this bites, gentle Gavin.
And why don't we get as many feel, good,
silly moments that adults and kids can both enjoy?
Well.
The answer might surprise you.
It's not that other children's media can't do this.
It's just that a lot of it intentionally doesn't.
This is because most of the children's media landscape is dominated by one
company and it's single idea of childhood. Any way you slice it.
Disney has had a monopoly on children's media for the past century.
The company is almost single-handedly lobbied to change copyright laws so that
its iconic franchises wouldn't enter the public domain and it's gobbled up
almost all of its closest competition. Buying the likes of Pixar, Lucas films,
Marvel, and 21st century Fox Disney's choke hold on.
Modern culture is so strong.
Both for children and adults that eight of the top 10 grossing films in 2019
were made by the big mouse. And the creepy thing for almost a hundred years,
Disney has relentlessly pursued the same single vision of childhood cuteness,
you know, lovable kind characters with big round eyes. In other words,
everything that SpongeBob is not. In fact,
Walt Disney was so aggressive in his pursuit of all things cute that he made
numerous enemies out of both his own animators and critics, scholar,
David forecasts details how Disney's pushed to make the seven dwarves as cute as
possible. Contra the source material created massive opposition,
even leading the animators to draw pornographic depictions of the characters and
protest depictions that for scholarly purposes,
we wish that survived. But as Chilean SAS and ex Disney kid,
Ariel Dorfman explains the mouse's soul, his desire to make all things cute.
Wasn't simply born out of an obsession with SaaS horizon.
It was part of a larger cultural package. Disney was selling to the world,
children in Disney's construction, live in a state of pure Eden like innocence,
which was reflected in the aesthetic of the cartoons.
This aesthetic Dorfman contends would be used to sugarcoat any ugly truth.
Disney wanted to sell from less bad things like the nuclear family to very bad
things like colonialism case in point is this infamous comic book in which
Donald Duck's nephews visit places like Aztec land and Inca Blinko racialized
parodies of central and South America only to find the natives,
their simple-minded savages who willingly give away their treasures.
But what does this all have to do with SpongeBob? Well,
just as Disney has been promoting a very specific brand of childhood.
So two is Nickelodeon and at least partially in reaction to Disney's reign of
innocent DOAs.
But whereas Disney's brand is based on perpetuating a particular myth of what
childhood is Nickelodeon's brand is based on giving children more agency.
According to Linda, Semanski a producer at Nickelodeon during the heyday,
the network was groundbreaking in that it rigorously focused,
tested each show on children. If kids didn't like to show it,
wouldn't be picked up in Symansky's view.
This all reinforced Nickelodeon's underlying philosophy that kids lived in a
grownup world and that it was tough to be a kid.
When you had to follow all the grownup rules,
unlike Disney Nickelodeon preach the gospel of childhood that believed kids
should be free to play around, have fun and stand up for themselves.
Whereas Disney bulked it,
anything that broke from its cute idealized form of childhood Nickelodeon
embraced everything from gross out humor to avant-garde animation styles,
to storylines far outside of your typical children's narrative. In other words,
a show like SpongeBob could only exist on a network like Nickelodeon.
It's strange Tiki inspired, aesthetic resembles,
and nothing of Disney's highly regimented animation style.
Not to mention all those weird moments in SpongeBob that break the fourth wall
with live action components, outlaw, patchy, the pirate.
And let's not forget about all the gross out closeups and adult topics in the
show. I mean really this series broached the topic of gay marriage in 2002.
That's not to make Nickelodeon out to be some kind of mom and pop animation shop
after all it's owned by Viacom and empire in and of itself,
presumably just as eager as Disney to make a buck. And that,
that brings us to an aspect that area's never really delved into the way our
modern conception of childhood has been shaped by consumerism.
SpongeBob offers children something more robust than Disney's bland vision of
childhood. So much of it is about transgression SpongeBob. Isn't a kid,
but he's not quite an adult. He drifts between hyper competence.
First I dropped his head. Then I erased some of the more detailed features and
I thought gold thingy, incompetence.
[inaudible].
Whaling humor of bounds as well as a whole episode,
devoted to the concept of courage.
Crabs is,
do you kiss your mother with that mouth?
Wait,
Nickelodeon is offering kids greater agency by letting them test boundaries
through an underwater sponges. Kind of like them,
not as much a pure child as companies like Disney would have you believe,
but not full adults either. And because we live under capitalism,
if kids feel empowered to buy a SpongeBob ice cream bars are results more,
the better in the case of SpongeBob,
this more empowering vision of childhood certainly has been successful.
What's more,
we've contend that it's the very reason your Twitter feed continues to be
dominated by SpongeBob meets means often made by the very adults who grew up
with bikini bottom in the first place,
while the memes are diverse and fully glorious,
they tend overwhelmingly to take the form of reaction means this suggests a
level of identification between the person sharing the meme and the character,
whether we're talking about going into beast mode or feeling confused when
people comfort us while SpongeBob's meme ability has a ton to do with the shows
invented visual storytelling,
the lasting appeal of these images suggest something deeper,
perhaps that SpongeBob endures for us precisely because of the fluidity of its
characters and the freedom they gave us to just be kids without being children.
But what do you guys is SpongeBob or regulatory depiction of childhood or is
this face just impossible? Not to me, let us know in the comments. Huge,
thanks to our incredible patrons for your support hit that subscribe button and
as always, thanks for watching.
[Inaudible].